welcome to the fifth video of my
algorithmic trading video course using
python and the quantconnect platform
if you're new to this series i recommend
first watching the previous videos
before continuing with this one
in today's video lesson we will continue
our closer exploration of the quan
connect api
more specifically we will dive into how
to deal with all kinds of trade orders
as well as how to make use of the
debugging and logging tools that
quantconnect provides
for this we will once again be creating
a relatively simple trading bot
to make sure you get the most out of
your learning make sure to code along
if you haven't created your free
quantconnect account yet you can do so
using the link in description box below
but before we jump into the action and
start actually coding this trading pod
let's first explore how quantconnect
handles trade orders on a conceptual
level
for this we first look at the concept of
order tickets
an order ticket is the object you get
after creating an order of any kind
it is used to track access and edit the
given order
the reason why you need an order ticket
object instead of just an object for the
order itself
is that orders are asynchronous this
means that any potential updates
first need to be requested and there is
no guarantee that they will go through
if for example you send a limit order
for 100 shares of apple
and then decide that you want to cancel
or update this order a few minutes later
you can only do so if the order has not
yet been filled
some of the most interesting properties
of an order ticket object
are its status order id symbol
quantity quantity filled average fill
price and order type
but more on some of these later now
let's first take a look at how to
actually place orders and thereby create
order tickets in the first place
quantconnect supports five different
order types that we will go over one by
one now
the first most simple order type is a
standard market order
market orders are filled at the first
available price and they can be sent by
using the self.market order method
of the qc algorithm class save.market
order
takes two required arguments the first
being the symbol that you want to send a
market order for
and the second being the order quantity
so a market order for 50 shares of tesla
would look like this
note that here it would usually be
better to use a symbol object instead of
a ticker symbol but in most cases both
would work
since market orders usually fail right
away you can't really update them
after they are sent to make things as
realistic as possible quantconnect does
account for the spread
this means buy orders are filled at the
asking price and sell orders are filled
at the bid price
by default the market order method is
synchronous which means that your
algorithm will wait up to 5 seconds
until the order field before moving on
to the next line of code
it is also possible to customize this
timeout delay with
self.transactions.marketordefilltimeout
as a third optional argument you can
also specify whether the market order
should be sent asynchronously
passing true here will mean that your
algorithm will not wait before moving on
to the next line of code
this can be useful if you're trading
large order sizes sending many orders
or trading in illiquid markets and don't
want your algorithm to always wait for
the entire market order to be filled
the market order method or any other
audio type method for that matcher
will return an order ticket object to
save the corresponding ticket you simply
have to save the output to a variable
the next order type is a limit order
which allows you to specify a price at
which you want your order to be filled
at
limit orders usually take longer to fill
or might sometimes not even get filled
at
all but on the flip side they allow you
to get better entry and exit prices than
market orders
you can send a limit order by using
self.limit order which takes three
arguments
the first two are the symbol and the
quantity so the same as for market
orders
and the third argument is the limit
price since limit orders can take longer
to fill or might not be filled at all
it is possible to update them but more
on updating orders in a few minutes
next up there also are stock market
orders this is basically a market
order that is sent as soon as a
predetermined price is reached
this price can be specified as the third
argument
so for instance this stock market order
would mean that a market order to sell
200 shares of spy
will be sent as soon as spy's price
drops by 10 percent
assuming that the spy close variable
represents buyers latest closing price
note that if prices are very volatile or
gapping up or down
a stock market order might be executed
at a much worse price than the specified
trigger price
besides stop market orders there also
are stop limit orders
which basically work the same way as
stop market orders with the only
difference being that a limit order
instead of a market order will be sent
here you can specify the limit price as
a fourth argument
last but not least the rules are marked
on open and market on close orders
like the name implies these orders are
filled at the open or closed price of a
given security
these orders must be submitted at least
two minutes before the open or close
respectively
here you can once again only specify a
symbol and a quantity
note that if you're using daily data or
another relatively low resolution
there's a high chance that your market
orders will be turned into market on
open orders
this is the case because data is
submitted at its end time
which usually is during market
inactivity so if you send out any market
orders based on this
info and the market is closed they will
automatically be converted into market
on open orders
if you are confused about what i mean
with data being submitted on its end
time
i recommend watching the third video of
this series where i covered the
essential topic
of understanding how time is being
handled inside of the lean trading
engine
you might be asking yourself why there
aren't any more complex order types such
as trading stop loss orders or
contingency
orders even though quantconnect does not
have a direct helper method
for these you can still create more
complex orders out of the aforementioned
audio types
later in this video i will show you an
example of how you could go about
creating a trailing stop loss order
besides the type of order you can also
specify the time in force of an order
which basically just is the length of
time that an order stays open until it
is filled
note that the time in force can only be
adjusted for non-market orders
since market orders usually are filled
right away
there are three different settings for
the time and force property
the default value is good to cancel
which means that the order stays open
until it is either filled
or manually cancelled the second
possible value is day
which means that the order will stay
active until the end of the day
the final possible value is good till
date which allows you to specify a date
until the order should remain open
if this day is reached and the order has
not yet been filled
it will be cancelled to change the time
and force of an order
you have to set the time and force value
of the default order properties
attribute
for instance changing the time and force
today would look like this
next up let's take a look at how we can
go about updating and canceling orders
like i already mentioned earlier
depending on the order type the things
you can update can vary all order types
allow you to update that tag property
tags can be used to mark a certain order
ticket for later reference
but it has no actual effect on your
trades this table shows which properties
you can update for the various order
types
updating the stop price of a stop order
while the price of the security rises
is one way to create a trading stop
order
to actually update an order you need to
create an update order fields object
and then specify the properties that you
want to update
you can then pass this object into the
update method on the given order ticket
i will show this in a more detailed
manner later when we code the actual
trading bot
updating an order returns an order
response object
which you can use to find out whether
the update was successful or not
to cancel an order you simply call the
cancel method
on the given order ticket note however
that you cannot do this for market
orders since they are typically filled
immediately
next let's talk about position sizing
when sending trade orders
you usually want to dynamically adjust
their position sizing in relation to the
available capital in your portfolio for
example
instead of always sending an order for
100 shares you'd probably rather want to
send an order for 10
of your portfolio's capital luckily
quantconnect has some helper functions
to make this easier as well
the first and most commonly used helper
function is one that we already used in
the last video
namely the sets holdings method set
holdings allows you to specify what
percentage of your portfolio you want to
allocate to a given security
then your algorithm automatically
computes the adequate order size
and sends out a market order to reach
the specified allocation
as an optional third argument you can
pass a boolean that specifies whether
existing holdings should be liquidated
before your portfolio capital is
allocated
alternatively you can use set holdings
to scale your holdings up or down to the
desired level
for this you need to pass a list of
portfolio target objects like this
doing so will send out market orders so
that your holdings in spy
will be scaled down or up to 80 percent
and those in ibm
to 20 of your buying power
if you don't want to use market orders
for your trading you can't use the set
holdings helper function however there
is still another way to intelligently
calculate order sizes
for this you can use self.calculate
order quantity which takes two arguments
the first is a symbol and the second is
a percentage
this will then return an integer which
represents the number of shares
of the specified security that would
make up the specified percentage of your
available buying power
so for instance this is how you could
send a limit order that allocates 30
of your buying power to apple at its
current market price
sometimes it can be useful to have a
buffer of cash in your account so that
you don't suddenly run out of buying
power
to ensure that you always have enough
cash reserves you can use
portfolio value percentage and set it to
a percentage of your portfolio that you
want to keep in cash
an easy way to close positions is using
self.liquidate
without any arguments self.liquidate
will simply liquidate all your holdings
using market orders
alternatively you can pass a specific
symbol to only closed positions in this
security
before we finally move on to the actual
coding part of this video
there are a few more things i want to
cover one of them is the on
order event method this is an event
handler that is automatically called
every time an order event such as a
change in the status of an order occurs
this is a great way to check when your
orders are being filled and potentially
act upon this information
as soon as you have it possible order
statuses include submitted
filled partially filled canceled invalid
and
others we will cover this in more detail
once we start
coding in a few minutes besides
accessing orders through order events
you can also do so through your
algorithms transaction manager
for example self.transactions.get
open orders allows you to get all the
open orders for a specified symbol
furthermore you can use
self.transactions.getorderbyid to get
the orders by their order id
another helper method that the
transactions manager provides
is cancel open orders which allows you
to cancel all open orders for security
or the entire portfolio this can be very
useful
in a scenario where you would want to
stop all trading activity
last but not least quantconnect also has
the option for you to select from
various different fee and brokerage
models to model trading costs
as realistically as possible you can
also create your own custom slippage and
other transaction cost models
but since this is a more advanced topic
this is something we might cover later
in this series
that said let us now finally start
putting some of the things learned here
into practice by writing some code just
like last time let me quickly present
the trading strategy that we will
implement on a theoretical level before
we start actually writing the code
once again the strategy that we will be
implementing is a very simple strategy
and i would not recommend trading it
with real money
its main purpose is to show how orders
are being handled inside of quant
connect
the idea behind this strategy is to buy
and hold a given stock or etf
we then create a trading stop loss order
that trails the stock's price
five percent below its price this
hopefully allows us to keep our losers
relatively small
while leaving the winner's room to go up
if our stop-loss is hit
we exit the position and then we wait
for one month before we start investing
again
if we wouldn't wait for some time before
investing again the trailing stop would
be quite useless since we would just
immediately rebuy after closing the
position
for this video we will be using the etf
qqq for our trading
but feel free to try out different
stocks or other etfs
that said let's now head over to the
quantconnect platform and start
implementing the code for this strategy
inside of the quantconnect platform we
will create a new algorithm
inside of the lab tab since we don't
need the strategybuilder we will exit
the builder mode and start with a blank
template algorithm
as always we will then start by
implementing the initialize method
this is where we will set a few
backtesting settings add the necessary
data
and define some helper variables that we
will need later
first off we start by setting the start
and end dates for our back
test here you can choose whatever time
frame you want to
i'll just go for 2018 until 2021
after that we set the starting cache
balance for this bag test
remember that this is only for back
testing in real trading this will be
your account balance
thereafter we want to add the data for
qqq
which is the security that this
algorithm will be trading
for this we can use the add equity
method and pass the qqq ticker symbol as
well as a resolution
here we will go with hourly resolution
but you could also use daily or another
resolution
we then save the symbol object of qqq to
the variable self.qqq
which we will use to reference this
security in our algorithm
now all that's left to do in the
initialize method is define and
initialize a couple of helper variables
here we first create two variables that
we will use to access the order tickets
of our entry and exit orders
we call the first variable entry ticket
and the second one a stop
market ticket and we initialize both to
none
then we create two more variables to
track the field time of the entry and
exit orders
this will be used to make sure that we
wait 30 days before starting to invest
again
here we call the first variable entry
time and the second
stop market fill time we initialize both
for the earliest possible date
since no orders have been filled yet
last but not least we create the helper
variable self.highest price which
unsurprisingly keeps track of qqq's
highest price
we need this for our trading stop loss
later
with that we are now done with the
initialize method and can move on to the
on data method
this is called every time the algorithm
receives new data
for a more detailed breakdown of how
data flows inside of the qc algorithm
class
make sure to check out some of the
previous videos of this series
before we write the actual python code
let's sketch out what we want to do
with a few comments the first thing we
want to do in the on data
method is check whether 30 days have
passed since we closed the last position
then we want to send an entry limit
order for as many shares of qq as we can
buy
since we will be using limit orders
there's no guarantee that they will be
filled
if the limit order is not filled within
one day we will move up the limit price
so that we
increase the chance of getting filled
the final thing that we want to do in
the on data method is move up the price
of the trailing stop loss if necessary
you might have noticed that we don't
actually send out any stop loss order
anywhere in the ondata method that's
because we do this in the on
order event method this event handler is
called on every order event
and this is where we want to send out
the stop loss order
however we only want to do this if the
entry limit order is filled
last but not least we want to save the
current time in case our stop-loss order
is failed
we need to do this so we correctly stop
investing for 30 days
after closing our position that's
basically what our algorithm will do
so all that's left to do now is code
this out and then we're good to go
i will start with the on data method
waiting 30 days can be accomplished with
a simple if statement
for this we simply check if the
difference between the current time and
the stop market order fill time
is less than 30 days if it is it's not
time to invest again and we return
otherwise we move on for the rest of the
method we will need
qqq's price as you hopefully can
remember from last video
there are multiple ways to access qqq's
price we will just index the
self.securities dictionary and save the
most recent price to the price variable
then we want to send the limit order
however we only want to do this if we
aren't currently invested
and there aren't already any other
active orders for qqq position
we can check this with
portfolio.invested and
transactions.getopenorders respectively
if there aren't any open orders
transactions.getopenorders will be an
empty list
and evaluate to false if this condition
is fulfilled
we first want to calculate the order
quantity for this we can use the helper
function calculate order quantity
here we pass self.q as the symbol at 90
as the allocation of our portfolio
this will then calculate the number of
shares that we need to buy to achieve a
allocation of our portfolio to qqq
with this we can then send a limit order
with self.limit order
as an optional fourth argument we can
pass a tag for this order
for the sake of showing this i will tag
this order with entry
order since we might want to update this
order later
we will save its order ticket to the
entry ticket variable
furthermore we will save the current
time to the entry time variable
the next step is to move the limit price
in case the limit order is not filled
after one day
for this we first check whether more
than one day has passed
and then we check whether the limit
order has been filled or not
we can check this by accessing the
status property of the entry ticket
order ticket
if it has not been filled we want to
update the entry time to the current
time as well as update the limit price
to update the limit price we create an
update order fields object
then we set the limit price of this
update order fields object to the
current
price of qqq
finally we can then update the limit
order by passing the update order fields
object
to the update method on our entry ticket
order ticket object
now all that's left to do in the on data
method is update the trading stop-loss
price when qqq's price reaches a new
high to accomplish this we first must
check
if the stock market ticket object is not
empty and that we are invested
this ensures that we currently have an
active stock market order
for our qqq position
if this is the case we want to check if
qqq's most recent price
is higher than our previously saved
highest price
in that case we first need to update the
save.highest price variable to account
for this new high
then we once again create an update
order fields object
this time however we will set the stop
price to a new value
namely to five percent below the most
recent price which should be the same as
qqq's highest price
thereafter we just have to update the
stock market ticket and then we are
already done with the on data method
now all that's left to do is add a few
lines of code to the on
order event method inside of the on
order event method
we will first check if the status of the
submitted order event equals field
other possible statuses include
submitted invalid
partially filled among others but we are
only interested in the cases where an
order has been filled
that's why we return if this is not the
case
after that the first case we want to
cover is the case in which the entry
order has been filled
to check this we first check that the
entry ticket variable
is not none and that the order id of the
current order event
in fact equals the order id of this
entry ticket object
in that case we know that our entry
limit order has been filled
that's why we can now send a stop market
order for our qqq
shares for the quantity we can just
check the quantity of our entry ticket
object
since we want a stock market order for
the entire position
note that we pass a negative value here
since this is a sell order
[Music]
the third argument of the stop market
order method is the stop
price we want this to be five percent
below the average field price
of our entry order
after this the only other case that we
need to handle
is the case in which the stop market
order has been filled
to check this we once again have to
check whether the stock market order
ticket object
is non-empty and the order id of the
order event parameter is correct
in that case we simply want to update
the stop market order fill time variable
to the current time this is important
since this ensures that we will wait 30
days starting now
last but not least we reset the
self.highest price variable to zero
since we don't know if qqq's price will
be lower in a month from now
with that we now have successfully
implemented this trading bot
now we can click on the build button and
then on the back test button to test the
spot over the specified time period
since this is a relatively simple bot
the back testing should not take very
long
when the back test is finished you will
see a performance overview like this one
i don't want to go over this in any
detail since the point of this video is
not to create a particularly
well-performing bot
i will cover how to use this report to
analyze the performance of a strategy
later in this series for now i just want
to scroll down to the orders tab so that
we can make sure that this spot is in
fact doing what it's supposed to do
even for relatively simple bots it can
be very helpful to look at the orders
that are being sent to get a better
understanding of what it's doing
this can be especially helpful when your
bot is doing something it's not supposed
to do
and you're trying to find out why here
we can see an overview of all orders
that have been sent
if we click on the orders we can see a
more detailed breakdown of them
in the right most column you can see the
custom order tag that we submitted for
the entry limit orders
as you can see the first order here was
a limit order for 584 shares of qqq
with a limit price of about 153.5
dollars
this limit order then got filled pretty
much straight away
an hour after the limit order was sent
the stop-loss order with an initial
stock price of almost 146 dollars was
sent out
then we can see a bunch of updates of
the stock price while qqq's price
increased
until the stop order was filled on the
5th of february at a little over 157
dollars
the next entry order was first sent
about a month after this field time
which is exactly how we want it to be so
judging from these few orders the
algorithm seems to be doing what it's
supposed to do
besides analyzing the orders to ensure
you fully understand your algorithm
there are a few other debugging and
logging tools that quan connect provides
one of the easiest ways to double check
certain things is by using self.debug
this is similar to python's print
statements
if for instance you want to make sure
that the trading stop loss price is
being updated correctly
you could use sales.debug to print the
updated stop price to the console
for this you would then have to restart
the backtest and look at the values
printed to the console at the bottom of
the page
besides safe.debug there also is
self.error which prints a red message to
the console
note that if the same values are being
printed over and over again
quantconnect will limit the printing
rate to prevent browser flooding
finally you can also use self.log to
lock certain actions
these logs can then be accessed when the
backtest is finished at the bottom of
the backtest report
these logs do come with a limited
capacity however so you can't generate
megabytes of logs for every backtest
another great way to improve the
understanding of your algorithm is by
creating custom charts and plotting
certain values
but that's something you will learn in
one of the next few videos
if all that doesn't help quantconnect
also has a debugging mode which you can
access by clicking on debug on the right
hand side of your code
like in other ides you can set
breakpoints to the left of your code to
incrementally step through your code
besides breakpoints you can also add
variables or other expressions to a
list as an example let me quickly set a
breakpoint
on this if condition and let's add
self.highest price to the watchlist
if we now click on backtest the
algorithm will stop every time we reach
this
if condition furthermore you can see how
the highest price changes over time
incrementally stepping through your code
and analyzing certain variables
can be very useful when looking for bugs
note that besides watching simple
variables you can also track more
complex
expressions such as logical expressions
lists and much more
in my opinion the best way to get
familiar with the debugging mode is by
just trying it out and playing around
with it
that being said this was quite the long
video so i hope it wasn't too
overwhelming and you learned something
new
if you thought a few things went over
your head don't worry you can always
re-watch parts of this video
or even the entire thing in the next
video we will take a look at how
indicators work how to create your own
indicators
and much more if you enjoyed this video
definitely make sure to subscribe turn
on the notification bell
and smash the like button for more
content like this thanks for watching
you